SURF-449 Add documentation for GQL FOR as alternate syntax for UNWIND (#1503)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/clauses/for.adoc

:description: `FOR` expands a list into a sequence of rows (GQL-aligned syntax; Neo4j 2026.03).
:table-caption!:
:page-role: new-neo4j-2026.03 cypher-25-only

[[query-for]]
= FOR

> The `FOR` clause makes it possible to transform any list back into individual rows.These lists can be parameters that were passed in, previously `collect`-ed result, or other list expressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `FOR` clause makes it possible to transform any list back into individual rows. These lists can be parameters that were passed in, previously `collect`-ed result, or other list expressions.
```

> :description: `FOR ... IN ...` expands a list into a sequence of rows (GQL-aligned syntax; Neo4j 2026.03).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:description: `FOR` expands a list into a sequence of rows (GQL-aligned syntax; Neo4j 2026.03).
```

for consistency

:table-caption!:
:page-role: new-neo4j-2026.03 cypher-25-only

[[query-for]]

> = FOR ... IN ...

Reviewer 2: Why is this `FOR ... IN ...`? All the other titles are not like that. In particular, it is not `UNWIND ... AS ...`.

```suggestion
= FOR
```

The `FOR` clause provides a GQL-aligned way to expand a list into individual rows.
It is valid wherever xref:clauses/unwind.adoc[`UNWIND`] is valid today and has the same semantics as `UNWIND expression AS variable`:

* for each incoming row, the expression is evaluated,
* list elements become separate rows,
* `null` produces no rows,
* a non-list value is treated as a singleton list,
* an empty list produces no rows.

The syntax differs only on the surface level: the binding variable appears before the expression.

[source, syntax]
----
FOR variable IN expression
----

For comparison, the Cypher `UNWIND` form is:

[source, syntax]
----
UNWIND expression AS variable
----

`UNWIND` is not deprecated.

> `FOR ... IN ...` is a synonym for the same operation, see also the xref:appendix/gql-conformance/supported-optional.adoc#gq10[optional GQL feature GQ10].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `FOR` clause makes it possible to transform any list back into individual rows. These lists can be parameters that were passed in, previously `collect`-ed result, or other list expressions.

The `FOR` is the GQL conformant synonym of xref:clauses/unwind.adoc[`UNWIND`]. 
`FOR` is valid wherever `UNWIND` is valid and has the same semantics.
`FOR` and `UNWIND` differ only in syntax.

[source, syntax]
----
FOR variable IN expression
----

For comparison, the Cypher `UNWIND` form is:

[source, syntax]
----
UNWIND expression AS variable
----
```

Motivation behind this suggestion:

1. Why does this page start with the exact same text as the UNWIND page. Both clauses provide the exact same semantics, yet they are describe differently. The page use the same wording to underline that both clause do the same thing.
2. The UNWIND page does not have this summary description of the semantics. Either remove summary here or also add it on the UNWIND page. My suggestion did the former since the description is also not fully accurate. The second point ignores that original row is kept and "multiplied" with the list, so to speak. Anyway, doing semantics by example avoids the complications of describing semantics accurately and into not too complicated words.
3. "syntax differs only on the surface level": What would be a syntax difference below the surface level? To me that would be semantics different.
4. "binding variable" is a GQL term, I doubt it has seep into the our docs, yet.
5. "variable" and "expression" are not introduce yet here. And the following content illustrate syntax difference well enough, anyway. No need to over-explain it.
6. "`UNWIND` is not deprecated.": 
   * The docs speak timelessly and positively about the functionality the product overs now. It does not engage in eventualities or speculations of the future nor gives it comparisons to the past or treatise about the history.
   * Why saying that something is not deprecate? Everything presented, unless explicitly marked as deprecated, is by definition not deprecated. You would have to say on every page the presented X is not deprecates, because most things are not deprecated. Deprecation is exception. Not deprecated is the rule.
   * Saying this on single page only raises more questions than it answers. In particular, it raises the question: Will UNWIND be deprecated in the future? Beside that there are no such plans in the slightest fashion, it is pure speculation about the product future which has not place in the docs.

[NOTE]
====

> Neo4j does not guarantee the row order produced by `FOR ... IN ...`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Neo4j does not guarantee the row order produced by `FOR`.
```

for consistency

The only clause that guarantees a specific row order is xref:clauses/order-by.adoc[].
====

[NOTE]
====
The standalone clause `FOR variable IN expression` is distinct from other uses of the keyword `FOR` in Cypher, for example inside xref:clauses/search.adoc[`SEARCH`] (`FOR query_vector`), in `FOREACH`, or in administration and schema commands.

> Those constructs are parsed in different grammatical positions and are not ambiguous with the list clause documented here.

Reviewer 2: This particular sentence sound overly technical. How is that relevant to the user? Users expect the thing we show them in the docs to work. They do not care if there are potential ambiguities or different grammatical positions. These are concern to us, but not to the user. So at least the should be simplified to something like:

The whole
```suggestion
Those constructs are functionality and not to be confused with the FOR clause.
```

However, stepping back further, the whole note strike me as a bit off. I do not remember having seen that before anywhere else in the docs this form. Like, the SEARCH clause does not have a note that its `IN` keyword is not to be confused with the IN predicate or such. Nor has SEARCH clause the inverse of this note here.

The only things I could see to make sense, would be comparison to FOREACH, since it is close in syntax and semantics. But I would formulate the strictly positive, just stating facts. Something like:

```
[NOTE]
====
While `FOR` expands a list into a sequence of rows for subsequent clauses, `FOREACH` only expands a list into a sequence of rows for the update clauses nested in the `FOREACH` clause.
```

But I am equally happy with just removing the whole note.

====

[[for-expanding-a-list]]

> == Expanding a list

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Unwinding a list
```

again, why introducing new words to describe the same thing?

> The following query transforms a literal list into rows named `x` and returns them with a constant column `y`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want to transform the literal list into rows named `x` and return them.
```

That is the respective text from the UNWIND `page`. Either adjust here or there. Whatever the preferred current style is. @rsill-neo4j

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
FOR x IN [1, 2, 3, null]
RETURN x, 'val' AS y
----

> When `FOR` is supported, each value of the original list -- including `null` -- is returned as an individual row.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each value of the original list -- including `null` -- is returned as an individual row.
```

The premise of the this page is the `FOR` is supported. There is no point is precondition every statement with the support of `FOR`.

[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [1, 2, 3, null] AS x
RETURN x, 'val' AS y
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| x | y
| 1 | "val"
| 2 | "val"
| 3 | "val"
| <null> | "val"
2+|Rows: 4
|===

On Neo4j releases that do not include `FOR ... IN ...`, the query fails with a syntax error.
The doc test expects that error trace to match the table below.

.GQLSTATUS error chain
[role="queryresult",stripes="all",cols="1"]
|===
| link:https://neo4j.com/docs/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/42I06/[42I06]: error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid input. Invalid input 'FOR', expected: 'ALTER', 'ORDER BY', 'CALL', 'CREATE', 'LOAD CSV', 'START DATABASE', 'STOP DATABASE', 'DEALLOCATE', 'DELETE', 'DENY', 'DETACH', 'DROP', 'DRYRUN', 'FILTER', 'FINISH', 'FOREACH', 'GRANT', 'INSERT', 'LET', 'LIMIT', 'MATCH', 'MERGE', 'NODETACH', 'OFFSET', 'OPTIONAL', 'REALLOCATE', 'REMOVE', 'RENAME', 'RETURN', 'REVOKE', 'ENABLE SERVER', 'SET', 'SHOW', 'SKIP', 'TERMINATE', 'UNWIND', 'USE', 'WHEN', 'WITH' or '{'.

_cause_: https://neo4j.com/docs/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/42001/[42001]: error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid syntax

> |===

Reviewer 2: I would not do this. 

1) It should be clear that if you use something that your version does not support, then you will get an error.
2) Unless something has changed recently, we do not generally do this in the documentation, cf. https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/clauses/let/
3) Error examples in general are comparatively raw in the docs. The docs should promise accomplishment rather displaying all possible ways a user may fail. So, error examples are typically limited to where it help understanding more intricate semantics or where we got actual complains from user not understanding certain error cases.
4) Syntax error messages in particular become an update pane. As you know from the implementation, they change easily with additional keyword. Even subsequent feature with that impact would also have to update the docs here. That is work we would put on ourselves without that much benefit.

```suggestion
```

[[for-equivalence-with-unwind]]
== Further behavior

> All cases described for xref:clauses/unwind.adoc[`UNWIND`] apply to `FOR ... IN ...`: empty lists, nested lists, expressions that are not lists, parameters, and combinations with `WITH`, `RETURN`, subqueries, and so on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All cases described for xref:clauses/unwind.adoc[`UNWIND`] apply to `FOR`: empty lists, nested lists, expressions that are not lists, parameters, and combinations with `WITH`, `RETURN`, subqueries, and so on.
```

for consistency

:description: `FOR ... IN ...` expands a list into a sequence of rows (GQL-aligned syntax; Neo4j 2026.03).
:table-caption!:
:page-role: new-neo4j-2026.03 cypher-25-only

[[query-for]]
= FOR ... IN ...

The `FOR` clause provides a GQL-aligned way to expand a list into individual rows.

> It is valid wherever xref:clauses/unwind.adoc[`UNWIND`] is valid today and has the **same semantics** as `UNWIND expression AS variable`: for each incoming row, the expression is evaluated; list elements become separate rows; `null` produces no rows; a non-list value is treated as a singleton list; an empty list produces no rows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is valid wherever xref:clauses/unwind.adoc[`UNWIND`] is valid and has the same semantics as `UNWIND expression AS variable`:

* for each incoming row, the expression is evaluated,
* list elements become separate rows,
* `null` produces no rows,
* a non-list value is treated as a singleton list,
* an empty list produces no rows.
```

> The syntax differs only in surface form: the binding variable appears **before** the expression.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The syntax differs only on the surface level: the binding variable appears before the expression.
```

[source, syntax]
----
FOR variable IN expression
----

For comparison, the Cypher `UNWIND` form is:

[source, syntax]
----
UNWIND expression AS variable
----

> `UNWIND` is not deprecated; `FOR ... IN ...` is an **alternate** spelling for the same operation (optional GQL feature **GQ10**, list value support).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`UNWIND` is not deprecated.
`FOR ... IN ...` is an alternate spelling for the same operation (optional GQL feature **GQ10**, list value support).
```

> `UNWIND` is not deprecated; `FOR ... IN ...` is an **alternate** spelling for the same operation (optional GQL feature **GQ10**, list value support).

Reviewer 3: add link to GQ10

[NOTE]
====

> Neo4j does not guarantee the row order produced by `FOR`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Neo4j does not guarantee the row order produced by `FOR ... IN ...`.
```

The only clause that guarantees a specific row order is xref:clauses/order-by.adoc[].
====

[NOTE]
====
The standalone clause `FOR variable IN expression` is distinct from other uses of the keyword `FOR` in Cypher, for example inside xref:clauses/search.adoc[`SEARCH`] (`FOR query_vector`), in `FOREACH`, or in administration and schema commands.
Those constructs are parsed in different grammatical positions and are not ambiguous with the list clause documented here.
====

[[for-availability]]
== Availability

As of **Neo4j 2026.03**, `FOR ... IN ...` is available as a query clause when the database uses Cypher 25 as the query language.

> It is a syntax error under Cypher 5 (including queries run with `CYPHER 5`).

Reviewer 3: i feel like this is covered by the page labels (cypher 25 only and 2026.03)

> At execution planning time, `FOR` reuses the same infrastructure as `UNWIND` (for example, `EXPLAIN` shows an unwind-style operator for both forms).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At execution planning time, `FOR` reuses the same infrastructure as `UNWIND`.
For example, `EXPLAIN` shows an unwind-style operator for both forms.
```

> At execution planning time, `FOR` reuses the same infrastructure as `UNWIND` (for example, `EXPLAIN` shows an unwind-style operator for both forms).

Reviewer 3: if we remove the info above, this would be the only statement for this section, making me question the entirety of the section. overall, it doesn't seem to be adding much

[[for-expanding-a-list]]
== Expanding a list

The following query transforms a literal list into rows named `x` and returns them with a constant column `y`.

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
FOR x IN [1, 2, 3, null]
RETURN x, 'val' AS y
----

> On Neo4j releases that do not yet include the `FOR` clause, the query fails with a syntax error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On Neo4j releases that do not include `FOR ... IN ...`, the query fails with a syntax error.
```

The doc test expects that error trace to match the table below.

.GQLSTATUS error chain
[role="queryresult",stripes="all",cols="1"]
|===
| link:https://neo4j.com/docs/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/42I06/[42I06]: error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid input. Invalid input 'FOR', expected: 'ALTER', 'ORDER BY', 'CALL', 'CREATE', 'LOAD CSV', 'START DATABASE', 'STOP DATABASE', 'DEALLOCATE', 'DELETE', 'DENY', 'DETACH', 'DROP', 'DRYRUN', 'FILTER', 'FINISH', 'FOREACH', 'GRANT', 'INSERT', 'LET', 'LIMIT', 'MATCH', 'MERGE', 'NODETACH', 'OFFSET', 'OPTIONAL', 'REALLOCATE', 'REMOVE', 'RENAME', 'RETURN', 'REVOKE', 'ENABLE SERVER', 'SET', 'SHOW', 'SKIP', 'TERMINATE', 'UNWIND', 'USE', 'WHEN', 'WITH' or '{'.

> link:https://neo4j.com/docs/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/42001/[42001]: error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid syntax

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_cause_: link:https://neo4j.com/docs/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/42001/[42001]: error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid syntax
```

|===

> When `FOR` is supported (Neo4j 2026.03+ with Cypher 25 as the query language), each value of the original list -- including `null` -- is returned as an individual row.

Reviewer 3: this should come first (then the "older versions" bit).
again, since the page roles already establish that we're in 2026.03 and cypher 25, i think that info does not have to be repeated :)

The same outcome is shown here using the equivalent `UNWIND` form:

[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [1, 2, 3, null] AS x
RETURN x, 'val' AS y
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| x | y
| 1 | "val"
| 2 | "val"
| 3 | "val"
| <null> | "val"
2+|Rows: 4
|===

[[for-equivalence-with-unwind]]
== Further behavior

All cases described for xref:clauses/unwind.adoc[`UNWIND`] apply to `FOR ... IN ...`: empty lists, nested lists, expressions that are not lists, parameters, and combinations with `WITH`, `RETURN`, subqueries, and so on.

> See the xref:clauses/unwind.adoc[UNWIND] section for examples and details.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
